welcome to the program I'm Jared Reed
Gaza has started vaccinating children
against polio a day before a massive
vaccine campaign is expected to begin
this comes after Gaza recorded its first
case of polio in over two decades a
hospital in Han unus began administering
the first dose of the two dose vaccine
even though the world health or health
organization's campaign officially
begins on Sunday the who plans to
administer the vaccine to more than
600,000 children the war has disrupted
routine vaccinations and destroyed
medical facilities allowing the return
of the highly infectious and deadly
disease Sam Rose is in Gaza with the
agency for Palestinian refugees known as
anra he has more on the challenges that
lie ahead it's certainly going to be
extremely challenging we as as as a
system as a humanitarian system and I
think it's probably fair to say as a
health system have never faced any
anything quite like this I should say
that unra is a big player in this we
estimate that we'll be
administering around half of all those
vaccines so reaching over 300,000 people
but it really is a joint effort LED
globally by the World Health
Organization UNICEF also heavily
involved unra my organization involved
in administering a lot of the vaccines
and and the Ministry of Health as well
the local Ministry of Health and without
all those different entities working
together it wouldn't have been possible
to get as close as we are to the start
now and we're really just hoping that we
will get over the Finish Line with these
vaccines over the next uh couple of
weeks in in what you've already said
will be a very complex a very fraught
effort similar to everything that we've
had to do over the past 10 11 months in
GDA nothing has been easy but this one
in particular is is is particularly
challenging given the situation but also
given the consequences and the need to
get it right could you spell out some of
these challenges in what is as you've
described at an absolutely enormous uh
undertaking absolutely I mean the
challenges have started from getting the
vaccines in getting the Cal chain in as
well the the the fridges uh the storage
equipment to allow the vaccines to be
moved around negotiating supplies of
fuel so that those vaccines can be
transported to distribution centers then
on on to health points the the
humanitarian pauses and the agreement to
uh avoid evacuation orders over the
period of the uh the campaign as well we
very much welcome that we recognize it
it's not been easy and we call on
parties to the conflict to adhere to
those agreements and beyond that just
the the mechanics of of reaching the the
the people uh wherever they are we
estimate 640,000 children need to
receive the vaccine that's everybody
under the age of 10 in Gaza we don't
know precisely how many uh how many
children there are given the situation
the tens of thousands killed overall and
the many tens of thousands more
underneath the rubble so the basics of
it that we would normally take for
granted are are extremely difficult and
then it's reaching the people normally
when we run a campaign like this the
children the parents would bring their
children to our health clinics this is
what would normally happen and this is
why before the war unra had a 99%
coverage of vaccinations uh through our
health clinics a lot of those health
clinics are no longer operational and
and the people aren't where they would
normally be so we have some fixed points
we've set up some health points in
shelters where many hundreds of
thousands are are Sheltering and we'll
also have mobile mobile teams who will
Who will go tent to tent to administer
vaccines and there'll be separate teams
looking at people and trying to capture
people on the streets and and it's more
complicated by the fact that we're not
able to do this uniformly in the same
time across the whole of Gaza there'll
be four days in the middle of the Gaza
street we will then move South and then
after that we we will move north and of
course we've got to do the whole thing
again in four weeks because every child
needs two doses of the vaccine that was
Sam Rose for from the UN Agency for
Palestinian refugees speaking to us from
Central Gaza thank you so much much Sam
for your time